---
title: "12 months to learn German"
summary: "At the end of 2021, I set the goal of learning German to a communicative level within next 12 months. Here is the summary."
date: 2022-12-10
tags: ["Languages"]
draft: false
searchHidden: false
---
At the end of 2021, I set the goal of learning German to a communicative level. To stay motivated, I made a New Year's resolution to fully commit to the learning process. It was worth it - 12 months later, my German is at the level I initially wanted it to be.

Now, I'm able to hold conversations on daily topics, ask and answer questions, and understand the necessary grammar rules. I also have a decent level of vocabulary and [quite good pronunciation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mG7GBGcABYQ).

Of course, it's not the end of the learning journey. I'd say it's just the beginning. But I'm aware that the most difficult part of getting started is now behind me. Learning the language has now become a habit and I feel guilty when I don't do it regularly. This is probably the most important accomplishment.  

After the last twelve demanding months, I have collected experiences that I would like to share. Below are some tips and an explanation of what worked well for me and what I would do differently if I had to start learning again.  

## My conclusions and the methods I recommend

**If your budget allows, consider finding a teacher.** Learning a language on your own can be often a fruitless process. It can be difficult to stay motivated and on track when you don't have someone to make sure you are following the right practices and grammar rules. This is why finding a good and experienced teacher is so important – it's much more effective than learning alone.  

**Learning will take time.** Don’t believe fake polyglots, who claim that they can teach you a language in a week. This year, I’ve spent around 144 hours having lessons with my teacher, as well as an additional ~1 hour each day on my own. This adds up to a total of around 450 hours.

**Be aware of language learning blocks.** They are unavoidable. This is when you know how to express something in a foreign language but then suddenly your brain goes blank. It can be incredibly frustrating, but it's comforting to know that with time, these language blocks become less of a problem. As you build a better foundation of language, they will come and go almost unnoticed. 

**Talk to yourself a lot.** It's a very effective way to improve your language skills. It makes you train grammar and vocabulary that you can later use in conversations with others. A great way to make sure that you know how to say something correctly is to use an AI translator like [DeepL](https://www.deepl.com/en/translator). Just type in the sentence you want to say, review the proposed output, and examine it. Look at the grammar rules provided by the translator and consider why they were used. This technique has helped me make significant progress. 

**Make sure to stay in contact with everyday language.** Watching TV series without translated subtitles is an excellent way to do this, as well as reading news and articles or listening to podcasts (which you can find on Spotify by selecting the most popular ones in a certain country). These may seem to be obvious activities, but it's crucial to do them consistently. 

**Don't use Duolingo.** It's a waste of time and energy. Apps such as Duolingo will have you repeating the same words over and over again without teaching you the grammar rules. Buy yourself a grammar book instead and make exercises. It's much better use of time.  

**Start using native dictionaries as soon as possible**. As you progress, multilingual dictionaries may no longer be enough to understand the language. For example, the most popular dictionaries for German are DWDS and Duden. They can provide you with a much wider range of vocabulary and help you gain a better understanding of the language.  

**Write in a journal.** Writing will make you think twice about every grammar rule you use. Even just a few sentences each day can make a big difference. You can use an app like [Obsidian](https://obsidian.md/) to do it. There are [no hard rules to follow](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IURNO3PkO1A) - just type whatever comes to mind. After a few months, you will find that it was worth it.

**Listen to songs.** While it may not be the most effective learning method, it can still be a fun way to discover the language. By listening to music, you can gain insights into different countries' cultures and potentially find [some interesting hits](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UOLipvFm_g).  

## What I could have done differently

**Create a database of new words.** I wish I had thought of this sooner. As you read and come across unfamiliar words, add them to a database such as [Airtable](https://www.airtable.com/) or [Baserow](https://baserow.io/), instead of using a note-taking app. If you have some programming skills, you could even create a quiz to make learning vocabulary more enjoyable and effective.

**Start using a language as soon as possible.** The earlier you begin using it in everyday life, the more comfortable you'll become with it. I made a mistake by not starting to use German in my business relations until about 8 months after I began taking a course. This was too late. If I had started earlier, my progress would have been much better.