---
title: "Don't build another AI tool"
summary: "A few words about the hype around ChatGPT and why many AI tools are likely to fail."
date: 2022-12-23
tags: ["AI"]
draft: false
searchHidden: false
---
The recent hype around ChatGPT showed how much excitement AI tools generate. For several days, social media was full of examples of what can be done with it, including [disputing a parking fine](https://notesbylex.com/disputing-a-parking-fine-with-chatgpt.html).

Many folks suddenly noticed that based on OpenAI solutions like GPT-3 or ChatGPT, they can build their own SaaS product. So we are witnessing a huge rise in the number of AI-based tools that are very likely to fail. And there are at least a few reasons for this.

Let's be honest - to create a so-called "AI tool" you don't need much. Usually, those components are a GPT prompt, some kind of form on the website, and payment integration. Connect it together and bang, you've got your own SaaS. 

It simply sounds too easy. Even non-programmers like me, who can build only with no-code/low-code tools, can do it without significant effort. Since it's so easy to create and competition is high, does it make any sense to build such a product? Not really. 

Some may say that, after all, there are GPT-based tools that do very well (probably the most famous example: [Copy.ai](https://www.copy.ai/)). What's different about such apps is that they came early on the market. Back in 2020, when GPT-3 was a new thing and hidden behind a waitlist, there was a chance to surprise a potential audience with your app. Especially when they were not aware, that behind all functionality is GPT. I know it because I also was involved in creating an AI-based tool, which eventually failed. 

Right now, people know GPT capabilities and have free access to it. So basing on core functionalities is not enough - your app needs to provide more than a simple prompt to GPT.

The other thing is independence. While building AI-based SaaS, as long you don't own the source code, you will always be dependent on third-party service providers (like OpenAI). This means you need to follow their guidelines, accept the limits and be ready to be completely cut off from services anytime. For me, it sounds like a quite risky business.

And last but not least: the development of AI goes so fast that your app most probably will be obsolete the moment you release it. I found recently an AI-based tool for converting English instructions into RegEx. Very cool thing. 

Right now, without any limitations, ChatGPT does the same - usually with a better result. 

Tools like ChatGPT, GPT-3, and similar should be definitely used as an addition to the existing functionality of the app. Building an app, which core is based on a simple API connection with GPT is nothing else like a waste of time and resources. 